---
title: "S Corp vs C Corp Tax Advantages Overview"
date: 2023-10-11
updated: '2024-12-10T18:04:43Z'
author: "Pablo Martell, CPA"
category: "Entity Structuring"
excerpt: "When establishing a business, choosing between two prominent corporate structures—S corporation (S corp) and C corporation (C corp)—is a pivotal decision."
cover: "/images/blog/s-corp-vs-c-corp-tax-advantages.jpg"
tags: ["Advisory", "Compliance", "Startups", "Tax"]
---
<p>When establishing a business, choosing between two prominent corporate structures—S corporation (S corp) and C corporation (C corp)—is a pivotal decision. Entrepreneurs and business owners often find themselves at a crossroads when selecting the corporate structure that best aligns with their financial goals.</p>
<p>Understanding the distinctions between these business entities and the subsequent implications regarding corporate income taxes and personal income taxes will assist you in making an informed decision regarding the business entity that would be more advantageous for your particular situation.</p>
<h2>What Is a Corporation?</h2>
<p>Before we delve into the specifics of S Corps and C Corps, it&#8217;s essential to establish a foundational understanding of what a corporation represents.</p>
<p>A corporation is a <a href="https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corporation.asp" target="_blank" rel="noopener">legal entity that is distinct and stands apart from its owners</a>, who are referred to as shareholders. This legal separation grants corporations specific rights and responsibilities, including the capacity to own assets, enter into contracts, borrow and lend money, engage in legal actions, hire employees, and incur debts. Additionally, corporations are subject to specific tax regulations outlined in the Internal Revenue Code.</p>
<p>A fundamental aspect of a corporation is the concept of limited liability. This principle safeguards the personal assets of company shareholders, providing them with limited liability protection against direct responsibility for the business&#8217;s debts. This characteristic represents a significant advantage for business owners within a corporate structure.</p>
<h2>What Is an S Corp?</h2>
<p>An S corporation, or S corp, is a limited liability company (LLC) or corporation that has selected the S corporation tax designation as defined under Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code. To qualify for this tax status, S corps must meet strict criteria. For example, they are limited to 100 shareholders, ownership is restricted to individuals (U.S. citizens or permanent residents), certain domestic trusts, estates, and tax-exempt organizations.</p>
<p>The hallmark of an S corp is its pass-through taxation structure. This means that the corporation does not pay federal income taxes. Instead, the income and losses &#8220;pass through&#8221; to the owners&#8217; personal tax returns, where they are taxed at a personal income tax rate. S corp shareholders can also minimize their exposure to self-employment taxes compared to non-incorporated business structures as they only pay these taxes on company income taken as “reasonable wages.” Finally, if shareholders meet specific criteria, they can use corporate losses to offset their income from other sources.</p>
<h2>What Is a C Corp?</h2>
<p>A C corporation, or C corp, represents the classic corporate structure. Unlike S corporation shareholders, C corporation shareholders face double taxation. The corporation itself pays federal income tax, and shareholders are taxed again on dividends and capital gains.</p>
<p>C corps have the advantage of allowing unlimited shareholders and the issuance of multiple classes of stock, making them suitable for larger businesses. Another benefit is the ability to retain earnings within the corporation for reinvestment, facilitating long-term growth potential.</p>
<h2>What Is the Main Difference Between S Corps and C Corps?</h2>
<p>The primary difference between S corps and C corps is that S corp shareholders enjoy pass-through taxation while C corp shareholders are subject to two levels of tax by first having profits taxed at the corporate level, then subsequently taxed again at the personal level for any dividends paid.</p>
<h2>Tax Advantages of S Corp vs C Corp Status</h2>
<p>Now, let&#8217;s take a look at the tax advantages of choosing between S corp and C corp status, shedding light on the tax benefits and considerations of each business structure. It is always wise to <a href="/services/business-structure-consulting/">consult your local business structure experts</a> when making a decision about your corporation’s status, as there will be state-level as well as federal implications.</p>
<h3>Tax Advantages of S-Corp Status</h3>
<h4>Pass-Through Taxation</h4>
<p>One of the most significant advantages of choosing S corp status is the avoidance of double taxation, unlike C corps which are subject to it. Double taxation occurs when the corporation pays income tax at the corporate level and then shareholders pay taxes on dividends or capital gains when they receive distributions from the corporation.</p>
<p>In contrast, S corp shareholders are not subject to double taxation as S corps do not pay corporate income taxes at the federal level. Instead, income and losses &#8220;flow through&#8221; to the shareholders&#8217; personal tax returns, and they only pay income tax once at their personal income tax rates according to their share of the corporation&#8217;s income. This can result in substantial tax savings, especially for businesses that generate significant profits.</p>
<h4>Reduced Exposure to Self-Employment Taxes</h4>
<p>S corp shareholders can minimize their exposure to <a href="/blog/florida-self-employment-tax-guide/">self-employment tax</a> (Medicare and Social Security) compared to non-incorporated business structures. Upon S corp profits being passed through, the profits are not subject to self employment tax (~15.3%). However, the owners must be taking a reasonable salary and these salaried wages <em>are</em> subject to self-employment tax.</p>
<h4>Flexibility in Loss Deductions</h4>
<p>S corp shareholders can deduct their share of the corporation&#8217;s losses on their personal tax returns. This ability to <a href="/blog/offset-capital-gains-with-business-losses/">offset other sources of income with corporate losses</a> can significantly reduce their overall tax liability. It provides financial relief during challenging years when the business experiences losses, helping shareholders mitigate the impact on their personal finances.</p>
<p>This flexibility in loss deductions can be particularly advantageous for S corp owners who have other sources of income or investments. It allows them to balance their overall tax burden effectively.</p>
<h4>One Class of Stock</h4>
<p>S corps are limited to one class of stock, which simplifies the ownership structure and can make the business more attractive to potential investors. It can also facilitate equity financing if the business decides to raise capital by selling additional shares in the future.</p>
<p>It’s important to note here that being restricted to one class of stock can make things between shareholders very difficult and complicated down the line. Having the flexibility to deviate from the ownership percentages for profit &amp; loss allocations as well as distributions in specific scenarios can be helpful, and S corps don’t have this flexibility. Choosing an S corp status needs to be well thought out and it’s highly advised to consult an experienced CPA before making this decision.</p>
<h3>Tax Advantages of C Corp Status</h3>
<h4>Retained Earnings</h4>
<p>One of the notable advantages of C corps is their ability to retain earnings within the corporation without immediate tax consequences. While these earnings are subject to corporate income tax at the time they are earned, they do not trigger personal income tax liability for shareholders until distributed as dividends or capital gains.</p>
<p>This feature provides C corps with a financial advantage over S corps: It allows them to reinvest earnings into the business for expansion, research and development, or other strategic initiatives without immediate tax implications for shareholders.</p>
<p>In contrast, S corp shareholders must pay personal income tax on their share of the corporation&#8217;s income, even if those earnings are reinvested in the business.</p>
<h4>C Corp Tax Rate</h4>
<p>C corps may benefit from a lower corporate tax rate compared to individual tax rates in specific situations. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) of 2017 <a href="https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/tax_cuts_and_jobs_act_of_2017_(tcja)#:~:text=For%20businesses%20and%20investors%2C%20the,flat%20tax%20rate%20from%2035%25." target="_blank" rel="noopener">reduced the corporate tax rate to a flat 21%</a>, which is lower than many individual tax rates.</p>
<p>For businesses that intend to retain significant earnings within the corporation for future investments or expansion, the C corp tax rate can be advantageous. It allows the company to accumulate profits at a lower tax rate, potentially fueling growth more efficiently.</p>
<h4>Attracting Investors</h4>
<p>C Corps can issue multiple classes of stock, making it easier to attract a diverse range of investors. This flexibility in structuring ownership interests can be particularly appealing to venture capitalists, private equity firms, and angel investors.</p>
<p>Also, investors often prefer C corps because they offer greater flexibility in equity ownership and dividend distribution. This can enhance the company&#8217;s ability to secure external funding, fostering growth and expansion opportunities.</p>
<h2>How to Choose the Best Corporation Structure for Your Business</h2>
<p>Selecting the ideal corporation structure for your business is a decision that requires careful deliberation, as it can have a profound impact on your financial future. The following points can help you determine which tax classification would be most appropriate for your company:</p>
<ol>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Assess Your Business Goals. </strong>Start by defining your financial objectives, growth prospects, and exit strategy. Understanding your long-term goals will play a pivotal role in determining whether an S corp or C corp aligns better with your vision.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Evaluate Tax Implications.</strong> Carefully examine your current and projected income, as well as your appetite for tax savings. If your business anticipates significant profits, S corp pass-through taxation may be advantageous. Conversely, if you plan to reinvest earnings and require the flexibility to attract investors, a C corp might be more suitable.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Legal and Regulatory Compliance. </strong>Ensure that you meet all the eligibility criteria and regulatory requirements associated with your chosen structure. Compliance with these regulations is essential to maintain your corporate status and benefit from the associated tax advantages.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Seek Professional Advice.</strong> Consult with a tax expert who specializes in business taxation. They can provide tailored guidance based on your unique circumstances, helping you navigate the complexities of tax laws and regulations.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Consider Future Growth. </strong>Think about the long-term growth trajectory of your business. If expansion, attracting investors, or accessing capital markets are part of your vision, a C corp may offer greater flexibility and appeal.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Review Exit Strategies. </strong>Evaluate your plans for exiting the business, whether through a sale, merger, or other means. Your chosen business structure can impact the ease and tax consequences of such transactions.</li>
<li aria-level="1"><strong>Regularly Reassess. </strong>The right corporate structure for your business may evolve over time. As your circumstances change, be open to reassessing your structure to ensure it continues to align with your goals.</li>
</ol>
<h2>Make an Informed Choice</h2>
<p>In the world of business, the decision to structure your enterprise as an S corp or a C corp carries far-reaching implications, particularly in the realm of taxation. Understanding the tax advantages and considerations associated with each structure is paramount to making an informed choice.</p>
<p>While S corps offer pass-through taxation and simplicity, C corps may provide benefits such as lower corporate tax rates and greater flexibility in attracting investors. Ultimately, the best choice depends on your business goals and individual circumstances. Consulting with business tax experts and carefully evaluating your options will help you select the best corporate structure for your company.</p>
